##Collective Action
<br>

Robert K. Merton's work on a sociology of science was concerned with, "...the cultural structure of science. that is with one limited aspect of science as an institution. Thus, we shall consider, not the methods of science, but the mores with which they are hedged about." (p. 268). In Merton's work then we find a concern for the collection, processing, storage and use of resources that are beyond the budget, expertise or capability of any one institution alone to produce or develop. Instead of asking questions about what this research discovered, and how it was impacted by these methods- Merton asked how it happened in the first place.  While earlier scholars, like Mancur Olson (1965) and Garret Hardin (1968) were debating the notion of collective action and its feasbility, Merton used the idea to explain the "extension of certified knowledge" , where individuals or institutions of science research do not act independently, but instead coordinate their activities to achieve a shared goal which benefits a broad community of stakeholders (Merton, 1973). 

In collective action scenarios, like ICOADS, where the performance or sequencing of activities greatly overlap there is the potential for conflict to arise in how best to achieve a shared goal. Mechanisms for identifying, and solving conflicts between different individuals then becomes paramount to the effective functioning of any given organization that depends upon some form of collective action - and especially those cooperatives which function through computer mediated communication (Easterbrook et al., 1993). This is not to say that conflict is not an important aspect of a highly functioning collaborative project; contemporary studies of conflict show that, for instance, resolving disputes over internet relay chat (IRC) allowed a distributed FL/OSS project like GNU Enterprise (GNUe) to codify unspoken norms, and create an archive of decision-making that they could refer to in future disputes (Elliott and Scacchi, 2003)
(Easterbrook)

Contemporarily, in the study of scientific cultures the central question facing institution scholars is this, “How do fallible humans come together, create communities and organizations, and make decisions and rules in order to sustain a resource or achieve a desired outcome?” (Hess and Ostrom, 2007 p.  42).

The collective action problems and dilemmas addressed in this proposal draw upon theories of human organization that attempt to explain how “a group of principals can organize themselves voluntarily to retain the residuals of their own efforts” (Ostrom, 1990 p.25) – and more specifically, how it is that individuals and institutions with overlapping research agendas are able to balance these conflicts, and coordinate their actions to successfully cooperate over long periods of time with very little government intervention and oversight.

A central finding is that the world contains multiple types of individuals, some more willing than others to initiate reciprocity to achieve the benefits of collective action...While no full-blown theory of collective action yet exists, evolutionary theories appear most able to explain the diverse findings from the lab and the field and to carry the nucleus of an overarching theory.