##Bakers, Brewers, Butchers and Common Powers

Both of the views sketched above -the cynical and the sentimental- are based on the assumption that people, whether they are NOAA sponsored scientists or open-data hackers, act primarily out of self-interest. Where cynics see the need to govern and formalize rules so as to guard against the selfish actions of these people, sentimentalists see the opportunity to capitalize on this selfishness by providing marketplaces where winners and loser will be “naturally” borne out. 

The cynical view stresses the need to govern and contract with the state in order to achieve progress in a collective action situation. Where two or more entities need to cooperate to achieve a shared goal, the most effective way to insure that one does not exploit the other is through government intervention and oversight. The theoretical underpinnings of this position are by no means new, they can be traced all the way back to Thomas Hobbes and his claims that "During the time men live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in that conditions called war; …Where there is no common power, there is no law, where no law, no injustice… and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short." \cite{hobbes1928leviathan}

The sentimental view assumes that funding shortfalls and disputes about the price of goods will be borne out in the exchange of self-serving actors. This view is also not new, its theoretical underpinnings can be loosely traced to Adam Smith and his writings in “Wealth of Nations” when he wrote "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our necessities but of their advantages."

[The Wealth Of Nations, Book I, Chapter II, pp. 26-7, para 12.]
