###Free riders

One of the most frequent dilemmas of collective action is the “free rider” problem. Free riding becomes possible when the total benefits from collective action are not a direct result of any one individual’s actions. When a group reaches a size where contribution to a common pool becomes difficult to track, and group membership is easy to obtain the phenomena of free riding can emerge: individual actors may consume or use more than they contribute.  Thus, an actor is said to "free ride" on the group's collective effort by benefitting equally and contributing nominally. 

Up until Olson's writing, the dominant belief had been that in situations where a group benefited from sacrificing individual gains for collective gain, that even self-interested actors would be able to recognize long-term payoffs and sacrifice their immediate gain for long-term stability. 

Olson first argued that collective action problems were grounded in a fallacy of composition - we tend to believe that the salient characteristics of a commons includes the total set of salient characteristics of the members / resources making up the commons (1965). Using this fallacy, Olson then proposed the inverse explanation of collective- calling it a zero contribution thesis: Self-interested individuals will not act to achieve their common or group interests, largely because the members of a group are so diverse that to assume each is acting in a common pursuit, shares similar goals and will act rationally to achieve those ends is to fall prey to the fallacy of composition. In his own words: 

>"Unless the number of individuals in a group is quite small, or unless there is coercion or some other special device to make individuals act in their common interest, rational, self-interested individuals will not act to achieve their common or group interests." (1965, p. 2)

Free riding doesn’t necessarily cause a cooperative failure, many successful collaborative arrangements will experience some form of the phenomena over time (i.e. Montgommery and Bean, 1999). Most scholarship in collective action doesn’t address whether or not free riding exists, but instead how groups react to, develop rules for, or enforce cultural norms that discourage such actions. A substantial amount of empirical research, both in laboratory and field work has focused on reciprocity alongside altruism and competition in trying to model how cooperation emerges in situations where the temptation to free ride is strong. 

In laboratory settings, Fehr and Schmidt offer some of the most compelling of these studies, claiming a theory of reciprocity that finds "economic environment determines whether the fair types or the selfish types dominate equilibrium behavior." (1999, p. 817), or put another way, "contextual factors affect the rate of contribution to public goods" (Ostrom. 2005). Axelrod's seminal work on the evolution of cooperation held tournaments to solve the "prisoners dilemma" a collective action problem where cooperation is shown to emerge largely as a function of the prisoners likelihood to interact in future rounds, and inability to communicate (1982). 