##ICOADS Background 
<br>
The International Comprehensive Ocean and Atmosphere Dataset (ICOADS) is a cooperative project that curates historical and contemporary marine data. The project was initiated in 1984 by researchers at the Earth System Research Laboratory (ESRL), the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). Over time the project grew to include international collaborators such as the Joint World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)–Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) and the Technical Commission for Oceanography and Marine Meteorology (JCOMM).  

In the follwoing section I provide a brief background of the motivations and early work of developing ICOADS. 

<br>
###Old Weather
In primary school most of us learn the basic geological fact that water covers about 70% of the Earth's surface. Therefore, any holistic account of the Earth's climate must necessarily include weather observations from the seas, oceans and lakes that cover our plant. But as these areas are unpopulated and it is both difficult and extremely expensive to build weather observing stations in the ocean weather records from this area are understandably sparse. 

To say that this geological inconvenience caused a gap in the record of weather observations would be a dramatic understatement. Joseph Fletcher, a pioneering climate scientist put this bluntly, "When we look backward in time we find the observational record frustratingly incomplete. We have satellite records for only a couple of decades and very incomplete radiosonde coverage for about four decades. To document longer term behavior we have only surface observations and for reasonable spatial coverage of this water planet they must include data from the ocean domain." (1992) 

ICOADS was originally developed to close this gap by bringing together historical marine data records that were scattered in national meteorological offices and naval archives around the world (Fletcher et al. 1984). As the project advanced from collecting synoptic charts and tape reels to processing and developing statistical summary data products, it became clear that the documentation, software and services that were integral to using ICOADS would make it not so much a dataset, but a "...readily accessible archive of global climate information." (Woodruff et al., 1986)

In its current form ICOADS is an international cooperative project to curate, develop and serve quality controlled data, metadata, historical documentation, and software to researchers interested in sea-surface flux variables [1](#chapter-1). Contemporary data come from a variety of sources, including the Global Telecommunications System (GTS), in-situ measurements taken by researchers at sea, earth observing satellites, as well as drifting and moored buoys. Historical data come from the original 1984 effort to aggregate existing marine data records from around the world, as well as a continual stream of historical records recovered from "ships of opportunity" - that is, newly discovered and digitized logbooks that recorded weather events during military, shipping, and even whaling voyages during the 17th, 18th and 19th century. 

All newly discovered data , whether extracted from digitized historical logbooks or discovered in the basement of an archive, are treated systematically - meaning that ICOADS curators preserve the "data source identification and measurement metadata with each record, and converting units and coding schemes to a uniform set" (Woodruff et al. 2011, p. 951) This process of taking heterogeneous data sources and uniformly processing and integrating them into a larger set of historical observations is the major value of ICOADS as a project. When digitized data are integrated with existing observations to create statistically summarized data products that fit a 2˚ x 2˚ grid the climate community as a whole - whether it is an atmopsheric chemist or an earth systems model developer - can use these data reliably. And importantly, the metadata that is recorded for each individual record allows researchers to trace backwards in time to verify whether the source of a supposed climate anamoly is genuine or the result of some data processing error [2](#2).  

Although ICOADS value is derived from the uniformity of historical records, it is also a continually growing archive of climate information: The first release of COADS data products contained 73 million records with dates reaching back to 1852. As more shipping records have been discovered and digitized the coverage of ICOADS has been extended to 1662 and now includes more than 261 million historical and contemporary records.