##ICOADS impact

ICOADS has, from its very beginnings, struggled to attract funding. As a preface to the first release of COADS one of the principle investigators noted that "It has taken four years and much effort by many individuals and several institutions to obtain and process the hundreds of tapes containing the basic data input. All of this effort was provided from ongoing activities; there was no appropriation identified for the task. It is a tribute to the spirit of cooperation among the participating organizations that the task has been successfully completed." (Slutz et al., 1985)

As a result of the data being freely exchanged between meteorological offices, and a desire to advance marine climatology more generally, the developers of ICOADS release 1.0 committed to making all of its products (data, software, etc.) freely available to the climate science community (Woodruff et al, 1987). 

Free and open access to ICOADS has helped it become recognized by the climate community as  "the most complete and heterogeneous collection of surface marine data in existence." (Woodruff et al. 2011) ICOADS data have been used extensively in earth systems science research, international climate assessment reports such as the IPCC, as well as being a fundamental component of reanalysis projects that combine historical weather observations with climate data to create authoritative, homogenous datasets for climate monitoring communities.  (Kalnay et al. ,1996) However, quantifying the impact of ICAODS has proven exceptionally difficult because when it is used as a part of larger climate projects it is often informally documented, and many of the domains that use ICOADS still lack a data or software citation culture which formally acknowledges these products in peer reviewed publications (Weber, Worley and Mayernik, 2014b). 