##Open Science
<br>

Much of contemporary science is made possible by access to publicly funded infrastructures; this includes archives of openly accessible data, suites of open-source software, and high performance computing facilities (Berman and Cerf, 2013). Throughout this proposal I refer to the sharing and free accessibility of these research objects as a form of open science, which provides a commons-based alternative to private intellectual property regimes. In short, open science can be seen as a set of governance structures that provide a "specific non-market reward system to solve a number of resource allocation problems" – this alternative to privatization applies to both the distribution and production of information as an economic and public good (David, 2003). 

While open science has its roots in the 17th century’s scientific revolution, the practices of making methods, data and software available for the sake of verification is taking on new dimensions in a computationally intensive practice of contemporary science (David, 2001; Stodden, 2010). 

Even though there are many emergent practices of openly sharing and pooling resources, basic science research still relies on traditional market-like mechanisms for establishing credit and measuring impact. For instance,  social capital defined as “the shared knowledge, understandings, norms, rules, and expectations about patterns of interactions that groups of individuals bring to a recurrent activity” (Ostrom 2000 , p. 176) – is typically measured through citations, and authorship productivity (Cronin, 1984). In fact, much of Information Science and traditional economic studies of science have positioned citation, and publications as a kind of de-facto currency (Hagstrom, 1988). There is some truth in the marketplace of ideas being “minted” in bibliographic data, but many studies have also shown that citations and publication have a very limited impact on  motivation, incentives and propensity to collaborate in large-scale projects (Birnholtz, 2009; Borondo, et al. 2014). Many alternative scientometric techniques are being positioned as a supplement to these traditional measures of impact (Bolen et al., 2005; Priem et al. 2010; Piwowar, 2013), but as I demonstrated in chapter two, the utility of these approaches to understanding  ICOADS use, its impact, or even what effect shifts in funding have on this project are limited with the types of trace data analysis that are currently available. 

Open science in many ways makes possible alternative measures of social capital, but in that it requires the sharing and pooling of resources across traditional boundaries of intellectual  property rights and ownership, it also renders many quantitative approaches from scientometrics ineffective in measuring the impact of any one resource, organizational approach, or project. The task at hand in a 'new economics of science' is in combining the examination of, "implications of the characteristics of information for allocative efficiency in research activities, on the one hand, with the functionalist analysis of institutional structures, reward systems and behavioral norms of ‘open science’ communities-associated with the sociology of science in the tradition of Merton - on the other" (Partha and David, 1994, p. 487).
