##Peer Production
<br>

Collective action in open science has been studied in a variety of settings, most notably as it relates to the emerging phenomena of eScience, or cyberinfrastructures  (Olson, Zimmerman and Bos 2007; Hey, Tansley and Tolle, 2009). As Jirotka, Lee and Olson (2013) point out the new possibilities for connecting disciplines through cyberinfrastructure (in the USA) or eScience applications (in the UK) have been broadly covered in at least six full length books on the subject (Hine 2006; Jankowski 2009; Nentwich 2003; Olson et al. 2008a; Parker et al. 2010; Dutton and Jeffreys 2010). There are many observations that could be made about this impact, but for the sake of this dissertation I  focus on how the Internet as an information communication technology (ICT) has transformed the distribution of labor needed to tackle complex, systems based problems through “peer-production” in an open science paradigm.  

The Internet has enabled the traditional division of labor to be re-calibrated for efficient use of existing models or organizing (i.e. Post-Fordism), but it has also created an alternative mode of organizing projects by enabling the distribution of tasks outside these traditional models, as Benkler puts it, "The networked environment not only provides a more effective platform for action to nonprofit organizations that organize action like firms, or to hobbyists who merely coexist coordinately. It also provides a platform for new mechanisms for widely dispersed agents to adopt radically decentralized cooperation strategies other than by using proprietary and contractual claims to elicit prices or impose managerial commands." (Benkler, 2006 p. 21)

The decentralized and non-proprietary phenomena of organizing work on the internet found early success in  Free / Open Source Software projects, such as Linux and Apache. What confounded organizational scholars (Lachine and Von Hippel, 2003; Lakhani and Wolf, 2005) and economists (Lerner and Tirole, 2002; Hars and Ou, 2001) studying the massive success of these projects was that people who were paid worked alongside volunteers, in an almost non-hierarchical manor. This seemed to violate certain basic assumptions of equality, reciprocity and incentives about work, and labor that economists had held for decades if not centuries (Benkler, 2004). The finding repeated throughout this body of literature is that FL/OSS participants aren’t some wholly new breed of altruistic worker – but that “interests” and “preferences” were much more diverse than simply monetary incentives. Freedom to reap rewards of one’s own work, the prospect of future employment, status within a community, reciprocity for help with their own projects, activism, and simply wanting interesting problems to solve were all key incentives to the successful organization of an open source project (Scheick, 2007).

Benkler describes these projects as a model of “peer-production” :

>a form of open creation and sharing performed by groups online that: set and execute goals in a decentralized manner; harness a diverse range of participant motivations, particularly non-monetary motivations; and separate governance and management relations from exclusive forms of property and relational contracts (i.e., projects are governed as open commons or common property regimes and organizational governance utilizes combinations of participatory, meritocratic and charismatic, rather than proprietary or contractual, models)" (2013).

The new mode of organizing that is enabled can be further refined as commons-based peer production, which is

>radically decentralized, collaborative, and nonproprietary; based on sharing resources and outputs among widely distributed, loosely connected individuals who cooperate with each other without relying on either market signals or managerial commands" (2006, p. 60).

While this early definition characterized individuals as “loosely connected”, Haythornthwaite later refined the idea in describing two models that dominate the organization of peer-production on the internet; the first is a lightweight model recognizable as open-source software projects. In a lightweight model of peer production many loosely connected individuals contribute effort to accomplishing small defined tasks. In a heavyweight model, exemplified by virtual organizations (VOs) made up of strongly connected and highly committed members whose tasks are loosely coordinated, and their contributions are accepted based on quality control mechanisms like peer review (2009). The results of heavyweight peer production are often smaller in scope than those of lightweight models, but they are nonetheless impactful in ways that would be unimaginable through hierarchically planned organizations depending on market-mechanisms like prices to guide their work.

In response to the growning populartiy of social network sites which also rely on forms of peer-production which are not commons-based, and the rapid rise of crowdsourcing, and other collective action organizations that share many of the same traits as peer-production, Benkler offered the following distinctions: 