##Bakers,butchers and common powers

Both of the caricatures sketched above -the cynical and the sentimental- are based on the assumption that people, whether they are NOAA sponsored scientists or open-data hackers, act primarily out of self-interest. Where cynics see the need to govern and formalize rules so as to guard against the selfish actions of these people, sentimentalists see the opportunity to capitalize on this selfishness by providing marketplaces where winners and loser will be “naturally” borne out. 

The cynical view stresses the need to govern and contract with the state in order to achieve progress in a collective action situation. Where two or more entities need to cooperate to achieve a shared goal, the most effective way to insure that one does not exploit the other is through government intervention and oversight. The theoretical underpinnings of this position are by no means new, they can be traced all the way back to Thomas Hobbes and his claims that "During the time men live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in that conditions called war; …Where there is no common power, there is no law, where no law, no injustice… and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short."

[Leviathan, Pt 1, Ch. 12]

The sentimental view assumes that funding shortfalls and disputes about the price of goods will be borne out in the exchange of self-serving actors. This view is also not new, its theoretical underpinnings can be loosely traced to Adam Smith and his writings in “Wealth of Nations” when he wrote "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our necessities but of their advantages."

[The Wealth Of Nations, Book I, Chapter II, pp. 26-7, para 12.]

##Between Cynics and Sentimentalists 

Over the last three decades sociologists, economists and political scientists have begun to recognize many alternative solutions collective action problems -  Common-pool resource management (Hutchings & Myers, 1994; Acheson, 1994; Ostrom, Burger, Field, Norgaard & Policansky, 1999; Agrawal, 2001), and Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) projects ((Lachine and Von Hippel, 2003; Lakhani and Wolf, 2005; Lerner and Tirole, 2002; Hars and Ou, 2001; Benkler, 2002) are just a few examples of collective action scenarios where a mechanism for organizing work, sharing goods and distributing credit have achieved high levels of sustained success by operating outside of absolute marketplaces, or the hierarchical rule of firms and states.  

This view takes a looser interpretation of selfishness, and instead locates incentives for cooperation and volunteerism in actors that are also forward thinking and diversely motivated (Ostrom, 1990). This is not to say that there is some new, altruistic fever of people and technologies working together to solve shared problems, but simply that there is more to motivation than self-interestedness, and more to governance than federal governments.  

In this dissertation, I use a case study approach to describe a long standing collaboration, the International Comprehensive Ocean and Atmosphere Dataset (ICOADS), that has solved collective action problems over a thirty year period (1984-2014). Although the particular details of this case are unique, I attempt to show how this case is representative of many successful institutions found in contemporary science where a middle path is tread between the cynical and the sentimental – nesting the freedom to self-organize and contract directly with one another within existing traditional, and hierarchically governed organizations. 

This is a descriptive case study (Yin, 2003), designed to reveal the unique aspects of the cooperative production, maintenance and use of ICOADS that I hope proves valuable to future science and technology studies desiring an information science perspective on issues of sustainability. I also argue that we can see ICOADS as an institutional arrangement, a kind of sociotechnical system, that will become more prevalent in the coming years; both as a result of shrinking federal support for basic science research and consequently the need to pool shared resources, but also more practically to tackle the types of systems-based grand challenge science problems that face contemporary science. The research questions that this case study addresses are:

>**RQ1.** How does ICOADS, as an institution for collective action, sustain successful cooperative arrangements in a post-normal paradigm?, and 

>**RQ2.** How has the governance and resource sharing arrangements of ICOADS evolved over time in response to external pressures from funding agencies, the politicization of the climate change, and rapid technological change? 

A major argument in this proposal is that social scientists studying sociotechnical systems, cyberinfrastructure development, data sharing and reuse, and eScience collaboration more generally have thus far failed to provide an adequate base of knowledge for decision makers to consult when faced with questions about the necessary policy interventions, likely success or sustainability needs of these types of institutions. This is not because these domains lack in high quality research, nor important findings, but because too often a new technology or collaboration is studied for generic design implications, rather than policy consequences (Jackson, Steinhardt and Buyhkter, 2013; Jackson et al. 2014). And, much like the limitations of a case study approach, these studies are often so different in their scope, investigative techniques, and recording of phenomena that valuable knowledge about these sociotechnical systems remains isolated and impossible to integrate. 

In short, if we are to move beyond simple panaceas for solving complex interrelated problems in sustaining sociotechnical systems then a comprehensive analytical framework is needed to address interactions between different types of variables (resources, users, technologies) and different levels of interactions (institutional, organizational, funding agency, etc.) - one that is flexible enough to be used in a variety of settings, and yet rigid enough to produce studies that are comparable to one another in meaningful ways. This shift requires, as Elinor Ostrom once put it, that we study and record "the unintended effects of particular policy interventions, so that dangerous combinations of policies devised at diverse tiers or attributable to particular aspects of a resource system and resource units can be avoided." (2007, p.15181)

My third research question then is methodological, in asking:  

>**RQ3.** How can analytical frameworks successful for studying collective action problems in other settings be modified for sociotechnical settings where issues of sustainability, cooperation and shared resource management are diverse and shifting over time?  

In the rest of this chapter, I argue that these are particularly salient questions to ask about institutions that are facing budget crises as a result of the politicization of climate research and that the International Ocean and Atmosphere Data Set (ICOADS) is an especially valuable case to explore these questions. To do so, I present results from three different studies of ICOADS that led me to these questions. 