##Science Commons

A science-based commons is simply a "species of commons dedicated to scientific data and information" (Contreras, 2011); increasingly this label includes the software, instruments and computing resources necessary to effectively conduct research in open science communities. 

Similar to a natural resource system, the pooled goods making up a science commons may be subject to many different forms of management, and intellectual property rights. This is an often simplified, and surprisingly overlooked point in discussions of research data management, and research data sharing more generally. Data, software and other products of basic science research play different roles within different evidential cultures in which they are produced. It follows then that these products exhibit varying degrees of rivalry and excludability, and thus, we judge what type of good a data product is based on these dimensions rather than assuming that research data are, in and of themselves, a type of good. Surprisingly, this point is not made more explicitly in studies of resource sharing and pooling. Instead, "data" are assumed to have high degrees of rivalry, and so are considered to be a private good or a common pool resource. For instance, Birnohotlz and Bietz discuss at length the economic principles of "rent extraction" for AIDS researchers who attempt to maximize the return value on shared data (2005). Birnholtz and Bietz, fully embodying the sentimental notion described in chapter one, use rent extraction to then describe design implications for systems that will store, and manage "scientific data" more broadly. Similar treatments of research data as a private good or common-pool resource can be found in Zimmerman, 2007, 2008; Cragin et al., 2010; Faniel and Jacobson, 2010; Tenopir et al., 2011)

This dissertation focuses on a culture that produce, uses and provide for resources that are impure public goods – and therefore are managed with relatively low degrees of exclusivity (i.e. not many people can be excluded from obtaining the software or data) and by the nature of the existence in digital form aren’t subject to rivalry  (i.e. your having a copy of this dataset does not preclude my having a copy). So, while there exists a large, diverse and well-established literature on sharing of resources produced by basic science research, many of these studies are not fully applicable to the domain that I am studying, and hold few implications for the work of sustaining sociotechnical systems of public goods. 