##Sentimentalists
<br>

> “… we’re making even more government data available, and we’re making it easier for people to find and to use.  And that’s going to help launch more start-ups.  It’s going to help launch more businesses…It’s going to help more entrepreneurs come up with products and services that we haven’t even imagined yet. This kind of innovation and ingenuity has the potential to transform the way we do almost everything"

*President Barak Obama, May 9, 2013 after announcing an executive order titled “Making Open and Machine Readable the New Default for Government Information”*

<br>
The opposite of a cynical approach to organizing basic science research is the sentimental - which sees an absurd value in every output of basic science research. The sentimental approach increasingly positions corporate sponsorship and commercialization of data and software produced by federally funded science projects as the key to boosting national economies. As Mirowski explains, in the wake of a global recession in 2009  applying free market ideals to basic science research funding has become wildly popular, especially among Western politicians who can cut basic science budgets with one hand, and bang the drum of "research and development" innovation with the other  (\cite{mirowski2011science}). The following anecdotes are from Western nations that demonstrate the increasing popularity of the sentimental approach:


- In 2010, amid efforts to balance a federal budget in Canada, the Minister of State for Science and Technology, Gary Goodyear, said the National Research Council (NRC) had begun to “lose its focus” and instead of redirecting or refocusing the agency, the NRC would be “transformed into a one-stop shop for businesses and offer concierge services to link businesses with federal programs aimed at boosting innovation.” (Hoag, 2012) Funding for basic science research has declined at a rate of nearly 20% per year since Goodyear made that statement. 

- In 2011, then Prime Minister of the UK, David Cameron said in a speech, “Life sciences is a jewel in the crown of our economy. It has consistently shown stronger growth than the UK as a whole.” For such crowning achievements UK universities and research funding faced a potential decrease in funding, estimated at  £600 million ($903 million) the previous year (Arthur and Piatt, 2010). To make up for this shortfall, it was strongly suggested that basic science research needs to do better at bridging the “transfer gap” to applied research.  

- Joint winner of the 2013 Nobel prize in medicine, Randy Schekman, noted that in the USA, "The budget of the NIH has declined in purchasing power by about 28 percent over the last 7 to 8 years...I doubt very much that in today's environment I would have been able to do the work I did in the early 5 to 10 years that led to my sitting here today and, more importantly the discoveries that resulted from it."(quoted in Austin, 2013).  A study by the Baker Institute for Public Policy at Rice proved his point; that the average age of a first time NIH grantee in 2008 was 42, and over the last 30 years the average age at which a Nobel prize winner completed their award winning research was 41 (Matthews, 2011).

- In March of 2014, the White House announced a new “data imitative” aimed at making climate and weather data more accessible, more usable, and more central to urban, agricultural and private industry decision making. Besides simply adding another tab to the data.gov website, the initiative was to engage private industry and philanthropic partners through “extensive open government data and design competitions” (Holden and Polesta, 2014).  Design competitions whose winning stakes were, it seems, access to (somewhat) better computational infrastructure provided by private companies:

- - Microsoft Research — would provide 12 months of free Azure cloud-computing access to the top 40 scientists and policy makers that won a design competition.
- - Google — which would provide 50 million hours worth HPC, and 1PB worth of cloud storage to the climate community, also based on design competition judging. While a petabyte of storage to many communities would be large, this cloud couldn’t even store half of the data used to produce the most recent IPCC AR report.
- - Intel Corporation — would sponsor three “hackathon” events held in or around Silicon Valley that would award new hardware to the winners of a climate related challenge.  

For sentimentalists, the funding crisis of science can be remedied through privatization, through increased commoditization of its intellectual outputs, and through a closer, more expedient marriage with private industry. The sentimental approach doesn’t see a central governance regime as being the most efficient way to protect its investment, but instead the free market where incentives are predicated on competition amongst experts for increasingly small pots of grant funding, and tying federally funded work even more explicitly to corporate, profit-based interests.